Closes #40 Initial ADCOEQ vignette (#53)
pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic: vignettes/adcoeq.Rmd

  display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARCAT1, QSSTRESN, ADY, AVISIT)
)
```

If the numeric values of the answers in `QSSTRESN` values are not ready to be used for deriving
scores and require transformation, it is recommended that `QSSTRESN` is kept in
the ADaM dataset for traceability, and the transformed value is stored in
`AVAL`, since that's what will be used for the score calculation.
For the CoEQ item 6 has to be handled in such way as in the "Positive Mood" section high values are supposed to indicate a positive outcome (original direction of item 6: 0 = Not at all anxious = Positive, 100 = Extremely anxious = Negative):

```{r eval=TRUE}
adcoeq2 <- adcoeq1 %>%
  # Add analysis value variables
  mutate(
    AVAL = if_else(PARAMCD == "COEQ06", 100-QSSTRESN, QSSTRESN),
    AVALC = if_else(PARAMCD == "COEQ20", QSORRES, NA_character_)
  ) 
```

```{r echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  arrange(adcoeq2, USUBJID, PARCAT1, ADY, PARAMCD),
  display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARCAT1, QSSTRESN, ADY, AVISIT, AVALC, AVAL),
  filter = PARAMCD %in% c("COEQ01", "COEQ02", "COEQ03", "COEQ04", "COEQ05", "COEQ06", "COEQ07", "COEQ08", "COEQ09", "COEQ20")
)
```

> We handle unscheduled visits as normal visits. For deriving visits based on
> time-windows, see `{admiral}` [Visit and Period Variables](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/visits_periods.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we handle unscheduled visits as normal visits, and hence, don't need to perform any derivations. For deriving visits based on
time-windows, see `{admiral}` [Visit and Period Variables](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/visits_periods.html).
```

I am somewhat unsure why we write how we handle unscheduled visits, when we don't actually do anything. I have tried to formulate something, but unsure if it makes sense?

Reviewer 2: I would be in favour of cutting entirely

Author: I would suggest we keep the general reference ("For deriving visits based on time-windows, see ..."), but we remove the first sentence ("We handle unscheduled visits as normal visits."). What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Agree

Author: Done

## Derive the four Subscales {#subscales}

> Scales and Scores are often derived as the sum or the average across a subset of
> the items. 
> For the Control of Eating Questionnaire, four subscales are derived:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Control of Eating Questionnaire, four subscales are derived. These subscales are derived as the sum or the average across a subset of the various items/questions. 

The subscales are defined as follows:
```

* Craving Control: Calculate average of items 9, 10, 11, 12 and 19.

* Craving for Sweet: Calculate average of items 3, 13, 14 and 15.

* Craving for Savoury: Calculate average of items 4, 16, 17 and 18.

> * Positive Mood: Calculate average of items 5, 7, 8 and 6 (reversed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Positive Mood: Calculate average of items 5, 7, 8 and 6 (inversed).
```

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't inverse indicate "1/"? In which case reverse would be clearer?

      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ03','COEQ13','COEQ14','COEQ15'),
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQCRSW",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Craving for Sweet"
        )
      ),
      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ04','COEQ16','COEQ17','COEQ18'),
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQCRSA",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Craving for Savoury"
        )
      ),      
      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ05','COEQ07','COEQ08','COEQ06'),
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQPOMO",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Positive Mood"
        )
      )
    ),
    dataset_add = adcoeq2,
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID, AVISIT, AVISITN, ADT, ADY, PARCAT1, TRTSDT, TRTEDT, TRT01P, TRT01A)
  )
```

```{r echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  arrange(adcoeq3, USUBJID, ADY, PARAMCD),
  display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, AVAL, ADY, AVISIT),
  filter = PARAMCD %in% c("COEQCRCO", "COEQCRSW", "COEQCRSA", "COEQPOMO")
)
```

## Remaining ADCOEQ Set-up {#adcoeq_end}

> The `{admiral}` [Creating Questionnaire ADaMs vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/questionnaires.html) 
> describes further steps like how to calculate the change from baseline variables or how to add parameters for questionnaire completion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `{admiral}` [Creating Questionnaire ADaMs vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/questionnaires.html) 
describes further steps, including, how to calculate the change from baseline variables, and how to add parameters for questionnaire completion.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we not add the adcoeq template link here like advs vignette ?

Reviewer 2: Yes please add, as event if the link ends up being broken, we know it will be live in 2 weeks time.

Author: Done

time-windows, see [Visit and Period Variables](visits_periods.html#visits). And
for flagging values to be used for analysis, see `derive_var_extreme_flag()`.

## Derive the four Subscales {#subscales}

Scales and Scores are often derived as the sum or the average across a subset of
the items. 
For the Control of Eating Questionnaire, four subscales are derived:

* Craving Control: Calculate average of items 9, 10, 11, 12 and 19.

* Craving for Sweet: Calculate average of items 3, 13, 14 and 15.

* Craving for Savoury: Calculate average of items 4, 16, 17 and 18.

* Positive Mood: Calculate average of items 5, 7, 8 and 6 (reversed).

These parameters can be derived by `derive_summary_records()`:
```{r eval=TRUE}
adcoeq3 <- adcoeq2 %>%
  call_derivation(
    derivation = derive_summary_records,
    variable_params = list(
      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ09','COEQ10','COEQ11','COEQ12','COEQ19'),
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQCRCO",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Craving Control"
        )
      ),
      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ03','COEQ13','COEQ14','COEQ15'),

>          set_values_to = exprs(
>            AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
>            PARAMCD = "COEQCRSW",
>            PARAM = "COEQ - Craving for Sweet"
>        )

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQCRSW",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Craving for Sweet"
        )
```

      ),
      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ04','COEQ16','COEQ17','COEQ18'),

>          set_values_to = exprs(
>            AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
>            PARAMCD = "COEQCRSA",
>            PARAM = "COEQ - Craving for Savoury"
>        )

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQCRSA",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Craving for Savoury"
        )
```

      ),      
      params(
        filter_add = PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ05','COEQ07','COEQ08','COEQ06'),

>          set_values_to = exprs(
>            AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
>            PARAMCD = "COEQPOMO",
>            PARAM = "COEQ - Positive Mood"
>        )

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        set_values_to = exprs(
          AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
          PARAMCD = "COEQPOMO",
          PARAM = "COEQ - Positive Mood"
        )
```

devtools::load_all()
library(pharmaversesdtm)
library(dplyr)
```

# Programming Workflow

-   [Read in Data](#readdata)
-   [Original items](#original_items)
-   [Derive the four Subscales](#subscales)
-   [Derive baseline and change from baseline](#chg)

## Read in Data {#readdata}

To start, all data frames needed for the creation of the ADaM dataset should be loaded into the global environment. Reading data will usually be a company specific process, however, for the purpose of this vignette, we will use example data from `{pharmaversesdtm}` and `{admiral}`. We will utilize `DM`, `QS` and `ADSL`.

In this vignette we use example data for the CoEQ. 
The example `QS` data (`qs_metabolic`) is included in the `{admiralmetabolic}` package.

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
dm_metabolic <- admiralmetabolic::dm_metabolic
qs_metabolic <- admiralmetabolic::qs_metabolic
admiral_adsl <- admiral::admiral_adsl

dm <- convert_blanks_to_na(dm_metabolic)
qs <- convert_blanks_to_na(qs_metabolic)
admiral_adsl <- convert_blanks_to_na(admiral_adsl)
```

Within this vignette, `DM` is used as the basis for `ADSL`:

```{r echo=FALSE}
dm <- admiralmetabolic::dm_metabolic

> 

Reviewer 3: No need to create dm again here

Author: True. Removed.

adsl <- dm %>%
  select(-DOMAIN) %>%
  mutate(TRT01P = ARM, TRT01A = ACTARM) %>%
  left_join(admiral_adsl %>% select(USUBJID, TRTSDT, TRTEDT), by = "USUBJID")
```

## Original Items {#original_items}

The original items, i.e. the answers to the questionnaire questions, can be handled in the same way as in a [{admiral} BDS finding ADaM](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/bds_finding.html). 

```{r eval=TRUE}
adcoeq1 <- qs %>%
  # Add ADSL variables
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(TRTSDT, TRTEDT, TRT01P, TRT01A),
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID)
  ) %>%
  # Add analysis parameter variables
  mutate(
    PARAMCD = QSTESTCD,
    PARAM = QSTEST,
    PARCAT1 = QSCAT
  ) %>%
  # Add timing variables
  derive_vars_dt(new_vars_prefix = "A", dtc = QSDTC) %>%
  derive_vars_dy(reference_date = TRTSDT, source_vars = exprs(ADT)) %>%
  mutate(
    AVISIT = if_else(ADT <= TRTSDT, "BASELINE", VISIT),
    AVISITN = if_else(ADT <= TRTSDT, 0, VISITNUM)
  ) 

> ```

Reviewer 3: We can display a vignette here to show how adcoeq1 looks.

If the numeric values of the answers in `QSSTRESN` values are not ready to be used for deriving
scores and require transformation, it is recommended that `QSSTRESN` is kept in
the ADaM dataset for traceability, and the transformed value is stored in
`AVAL`, since that's what will be used for the score calculation.

> For the CoEQ item 6 has to be handled in such way:

Reviewer: Should we specify why item 6 needs to be handled like this?

Author: @AndersAskeland  I added some text about why item 6 needs to be reversed. Please feel free to change the wording.

Reviewer: Thanks! I think it make sense to have it. I've made a slightly rephrased version in my latest review :)

```{r eval=TRUE}
adcoeq2 <- adcoeq1 %>%
  # Add analysis parameter variables

>   mutate(
>     AVAL = ifelse(PARAMCD=='COEQ06', 100-QSSTRESN, QSSTRESN),
>     AVALC = ifelse(PARAMCD=='COEQ20', QSORRES, NA)
>   ) 

Reviewer: I would stick with dplyr, add spaces, and use '""' quotes to be consistent.

```suggestion
  mutate(
    AVAL = if_else(PARAMCD == "COEQ06", 100-QSSTRESN, QSSTRESN),
    AVALC = if_else(PARAMCD == "COEQ20", QSORRES, NA_character_)
  ) 
```

```

```{r echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  arrange(adcoeq2, USUBJID, PARCAT1, ADY, PARAMCD),
  display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, PARCAT1, QSSTRESN, AVALC, AVAL, ADY, AVISIT)

> )

Author: Is there a way to increase the number of rows shown? If the number of rows is fixed to 10, we would need to filter for items 1 to 9 plus item 20 or something like that.

> )

Reviewer 2: you could add some filtering to keep only rows you want maybe?

> )

Author: Done

```

We handle unscheduled visits as normal visits. For deriving visits based on
time-windows, see [Visit and Period Variables](visits_periods.html#visits). And
for flagging values to be used for analysis, see `derive_var_extreme_flag()`.

## Derive the four Subscales {#subscales}

Scales and Scores are often derived as the sum or the average across a subset of
the items. 
For the Control of Eating questionnaire, four subscales are derived:

* Craving Control: Calculate average of items 9, 10, 11, 12 and 19.

* Craving for Sweet: Calculate average of items 3, 13, 14 and 15.

* Craving for Savoury: Calculate average of items 4, 16, 17 and 18.

> * Positive Mood: Calculate average of items 5, 7, 8 and 6 (reversed).

Reviewer: Would be great to have an explanation further up, why we reverse 6.

    filter_add = (PARAMCD %in% c('COEQ05','COEQ07','COEQ08','COEQ06')),
    set_values_to = exprs(
      AVAL = mean(AVAL, na.rm = TRUE),
      PARAMCD = "COEQPOMO",
      PARAM = "COEQ - Positive Mood"
    )
  )
```

```{r echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  arrange(adcoeq3, USUBJID, ADY, PARAMCD),
  display_vars = exprs(USUBJID, PARAMCD, PARAM, AVAL, ADY, AVISIT),
  filter = PARAMCD %in% c("COEQCRCO", "COEQCRSW", "COEQCRSA", "COEQPOMO")
)
```

## Derive baseline and change from baseline {#chg}

After deriving the scores by visit, the baseline and change from baseline variables can be derived:
```{r eval=TRUE}
adcoeq4 <- adcoeq3 %>%
  # Flag baseline records (last before treatement start)
  restrict_derivation(
    derivation = derive_var_extreme_flag,
    args = params(
      by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID, PARAMCD),
      order = exprs(ADT),
      new_var = ABLFL,
      mode = "last"
    ),
    filter = !is.na(AVAL) & ADT <= TRTSDT
  ) %>%
  # Derive baseline and change from baseline variables
  derive_var_base(
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID, PARAMCD),
    source_var = AVAL,
    new_var = BASE
  ) %>%
  # Calculate CHG for post-baseline records

>   # The decision on how to populate pre-baseline and baseline values of CHG is left to producer choice

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # The decision on how to populate pre-baseline and baseline values of CHG is left to producer's choice
```

  restrict_derivation(
    derivation = derive_var_chg,
    filter = AVISITN > 0
  ) %>%
  # Calculate PCHG for post-baseline records

>   # The decision on how to populate pre-baseline and baseline values of PCHG is left to producer choice

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # The decision on how to populate pre-baseline and baseline values of PCHG is left to producer's choice
```
